Now I will show you how to put into practice the concept I introduce you to in the previous video.
Again, the basic idea is to start with a pre-trained model which we do not modify or further fine tune.
Instead, we are going to start with a random matrix that we will train to maximize the activation of
one specific unit in the model, and that random matrix will correspond to a short sequence of tokens.
And just to give you a spoiler alert, it's not really going to work.
Well, that is to say, the code works and the analysis works, but it does not produce results that
are easily interpretable or sensible, at least not to us humans, or at least not to me.
So here's what we'll do.
In the demo, we will start by creating a set of random token embeddings vectors.
Because these are fake embeddings vectors, we want them to have the same distributional characteristics
as those of the actual trained embeddings matrix.
And that's what you see here.
So the blue line shows the histogram of the actual trained embeddings matrix.
And the orange line is our random embeddings.
Then we will go through gradient descent.
And I'll show you how to create the loss function to maximize one particular feature of the model.
And I'm just going to pick one feature basically at random, because we don't really have a theoretical
motivation to focus on any one specific component of the model, at least not yet.
So here you see the results of the optimization.
This line plot here shows the activation of these specific dimension in the model that I chose to maximize.
The gradient descent procedure was clearly successful in the sense that the random embeddings matrix
was transformed into a matrix that drives the activation of this unit up by like three orders of magnitude
above what it was by default in the beginning of training.
In fact, the gradient descent was so effective that I added an L2 regularization term to prevent the
activation from growing too much too fast.
By the way, you normally see plots like this showing the loss going down with training.
Remember that with activation maximization, we're actually implementing gradient ascent because we
want the function to climb.
So you can think of this as like a inverse loss.
And over here you see the norm of the gradient of the random embeddings vectors that are being trained,
the gradients continue to grow again, indicating that this procedure is working in the sense that the
matrix continues to learn how to become optimized to maximize the activation of this particular component
of the model.
And here you see further evidence that the optimization was successful, or at least that it did something.
So the orange line here shows the distribution of the random embeddings that I showed in the beginning
here.
And the green line is the exact same embeddings matrix.
But after the optimization.
And what do we do with those optimized embeddings vectors now that they are trained to activate this
one unit of the model?
Well, the final step is to transform these embeddings vectors back into tokens and then into text that
we can read.
The way we do that is to take each of the optimized vectors, calculate cosine similarity with all of
the real embeddings vectors that were trained into the model originally, and then find the token with
the highest cosine similarity.
And that's what you see here.
So here on the x axis we have our 50,000 tokens from the full vocab in GPT two.
And this plot shows the cosine similarity between one of the optimized embeddings vectors and all of
the actual trained GPT embeddings vectors.
Now, the most similar vector in this case was, I don't know, I guess this one, and that corresponds
to the token.
If so, when we repeat this procedure for however many of the random initialized but then optimized
embeddings Headings vectors.
We can get some text and then we can read it.
And then that is the text sequence that optimizes or maximizes the activation of this one particular
component of the model.
I'm sure you are super curious to know what that text looks like, so let's switch to code and work
our way through it.
Here are the libraries we will use.
Nothing new.
Nothing fancy.
Nothing you have not seen before.
Here I'm loading in the model GPT two small.
Also the tokenizer we will need for translating or decoding the embeddings vectors back into text.
Now technically this and a lot of other analyses could be run on the CPU, but that's more time consuming.
And we have the GPU available.
So let's use it here.
Here I'm switching the model into eval mode.
This is an important thing to remember about activation maximization.
We are training.
We are running gradient descent.
We're optimizing matrices, but we are not training the model.
We are training the embeddings.
So so we actually do switch the model into eval mode.
And then the last thing I do in this code cell is get a copy of the embeddings matrix.
This is the pre-trained embeddings matrix.
Now I am not going to further train or fine tune these.
I'm not going to change these at all.
Uh but we will need to access the embeddings multiple times.
And so writing all of this out is just kind of a pain.
So this is just for convenience.
Okay.
So here is the way this works.
We are going to create a sequence of five tokens and create the embeddings.
So starting off with fake randomized embeddings for five tokens, and then we will use gradient descent
to optimize those embeddings to activate maximally activate one particular component in the model.
Okay.
So I call that matrix optimize embeddings.
I initialize it as purely random numbers.
So normally distributed Gaussian random numbers.
And here importantly I set requiresgrad equals true.
And that will allow PyTorch to create a computational graph around this variable.
Or it's really just including that one variable.
And then that is what we will use to train that matrix.
Okay.
So then I'm going to use init normal to normalize this random embeddings matrix such that it has the
same standard deviation as the real embeddings matrix.
Okay.
So now we can check the size.
This is one by five by 768.
One corresponds to the batch dimension.
We just have one sequence that we are going to optimize.
Five corresponds to the number of tokens in our embeddings vectors.
And then of course the 768 corresponds to the embeddings dimensions for GPT two small.
So again the idea is what we want to do is find five tokens that as a sequence collectively maximally
activates one particular neuron or one particular dimension inside the model somewhere.
So this is what we start with.
This is what we are going to optimize okay.
And then here this is just code to show the histograms that I showed in the slides a moment ago.
Now it looks like the uh the embeddings matrix is basically flat.
It looks like it's basically zeros for all of these values out here.
And if you transform this into a logarithmic scale on the y axis, you can see that there actually is
a lot of information in the tails here and also some asymmetry in the tails.
But that really gets suppressed down when you show linear plots.
I often find it interesting and sometimes quite insightful to look at the same plots with linear and
logarithmic scaling.
Another thing I wanted to mention here is the scale of the y axis.
So this is maxnorm.
It goes up to one.
And the reason why I max scale each of these is because the number of numbers in each of these matrices
is very, very different.
So here this embeddings matrix that is 50,000 by 800, corresponding to the 50,000 tokens in GPT two
small and the 768 embeddings.
Dimensions.
On the other hand, the optimized embeddings.
This is not the full vocab of embeddings.
This is just for five tokens that we want to optimize.
So this has multiple orders of magnitude more numbers than this matrix.
So if we do not normalize then we still get results that are technically correct.
But there's just so many more numbers in the embeddings matrix that the random matrix looks like a flat
line.
Again, this is not a flat line, but it just appears to be flat because this numerical scale is dominated
by the larger matrix.
So max normalization is just a convenient way to allow us to focus on the shape and general characteristics
without having to worry about exact interpretation of the y axis.
Yeah.
So now you know, the thing is, we don't actually have tokens.
We have token embeddings, but we don't have tokens.
So how do we do that?
You know, normally when we work with these models, when we do a forward pass with models, we have
a tensor of tokens that we input into the model like this.
But where are these tokens.
We don't have tokens.
We just have the embeddings vectors directly.
Okay.
And that's what I'm going to show you here how to do this.
So model again.
What you were used to seeing is some tensor like this.
Here I'm using the optional input inputs underscore embeds.
And that means that we can input into the model not the tokens but the actual embeddings that we want
to push into the model.
So when the model sees this optional input.
It basically just bypasses the token and position embeddings layer altogether, and takes this input
and pushes that directly into the first of the transformer blocks.
Okay.
So now you learn something new about working with these models.
And we also want to output the hidden states.
That's how we get access to the internal calculations of the model, or at least the internal activations
of the model.
This you've seen before, although it was quite a while ago.
Remember that we get however many transformer blocks there are.
That's however many tensors we get in the output plus one.
So the plus one is we get the output of the embeddings layer.
And then we also get the first transformer block, output the output of the second transformer block,
and so on.
For however many transformer blocks we have.
If you've forgotten about this, then don't worry.
In a couple videos from now, I'm going to have actually two videos discussing this output Hidden States
option and how to interpret the output, and so on.
So what we need to do is pick one particular dimension or neuron or some feature in the model that we
want to maximize.
In this case I chose to maximize layer eight.
And so this corresponds to the eighth transformer block.
But it's the transformer block with index seven.
Because the first hidden state is going to be the embeddings matrix okay.
So this is just yeah, just one of the transformer blocks.
And out of the 768 dimensions in each transformer I'm choosing to optimize for maximizing the output
of dimension 91.
Now, why did I pick these numbers?
There's really no theoretical motivation for these numbers and not these numbers.
You know, I it's a bit arbitrary.
So this is more just about demonstrating, uh, the code and the mechanism.
But I think you will also see that, uh, you'll start to appreciate how difficult it is to scale this
kind of research, because, yeah, there's just so many channels that we could focus on here.
I think I'll even leave it as these numbers for now.
Okay.
So now I run this code cell.
So that pushes the, uh, embeddings through the model and all the way to the end and we get the output.
So here we see that there are 13 tensors in the hidden states variable.
So that's in outputs hidden states.
And then uh, yeah.
The size from one particular layer is one by five by 768.
Again, this corresponds to the output of the fourth transformer layer for this embeddings matrix.
And this embeddings matrix is randomly initialized.
And now we are going to optimize it such that this gets transformed through gradient descent into a
matrix into a set of c sequence of token embeddings that maximizes the activation in this particular
dimension of the output of the fourth transformer block.
Okay.
I hope that makes sense.
Uh, now let's go through training.
We are going to train 500 steps using a learning rate of 0.001.
You can see I'm using the Adam optimizer where I put in the tensor that we want to, uh, to optimize
using this learning rate and this lambda for the L2 regularization.
This actually comes in later.
I'm going to calculate the regularization manually instead of using it in here.
So in like weight decay in here.
In which case, you know, if we were doing it in here then we would probably want to use the Adam optimizer.
But it doesn't matter for here.
Okay.
So here is the loop where we do the training.
Here I'm just initializing some vectors that I can use to track the progress of training.
This is the activation value and the gradient norm.
So we loop over.
Oh I already forgot 500 steps.
And in each of those steps this is mostly pretty standard training stuff that you have seen before.
So clear out the gradients from the optimizer from the model so that we're not doing any gradient accumulation.
Uh, patch the embeddings directly into the model.
This is code I showed above.
Make sure we get the hidden states coming out.
And then here I get the hidden states just for this one particular layer that we are interested in.
And then within that one layer I'm getting out the specific activation for all of the batches or the
first batch.
There's only one sequence here, all of the tokens, all five of the tokens in this sequence.
And then just this one dimension, which is before was 91.
I forget what I changed it to 90.
Okay, there you go.
Close to 91.
And then yeah, now I'm averaging over okay.
So I'm averaging over all of the tokens.
So that means that this dim activation this is the dimensionality of the activation.
This is the average over all five tokens in this little random sequence.
And what we want to do is find a matrix, an optimized embeddings matrix that maximizes this number.
Okay.
So that is the that's the thing that we want to optimize for.
This is you could if we're trying to optimize for increasing this, you would normally think of this
as gradient ascent instead of gradient descent.
But I'm actually going to do gradient descent by just making this a minus sign here.
And that's just easier for all the rest of the PyTorch mechanics.
So we want to maximize this thing which we means we want to minimize it's negative.
And then here is the L2 L2 term.
And that is just all of the the sum of the squared elements of the optimized embeddings.
Basically this will just prevent the matrix from getting really, really huge because we have this constraint
here, this regularization term that will try to keep the weights as small as possible, while also
minimizing the negative of the activation of this dimension.
Okay.
And then here I'm just grabbing out the actual dimension value.
Uh, calculate all of the gradients on the optimized embeddings.
Here I'm extracting the norm of the gradient and then finishing the backprop by actually applying the
gradient calculations to the matrix.
And then here I'm printing out some results.
What I'm also doing here is showing the activation of the nearest neighbor dimension.
So this is for the dimension that we are trying to maximize the activation of.
And now, you know, if I didn't show any of this, if I didn't show the neighbor, you could say,
maybe this matrix is just activating everything in the network.
It's not unique to this one dimension.
So that's why I print out the neighbor as well.
And here what we see is actually the neighbors tend to get suppressed.
So we're not only activating this one activation, we are suppressing a lot of the other activation
dimensions.
Uh, arguably that's a good thing.
It makes it even more unique, even more targeted to this one specific dimension of this transformer
block.
Okay, so here I am generating the two graphs that I showed you before.
You see, the activation of this particular dimension increases over time over training.
It's clearly not done activating.
So we could run more training.
And I don't know if this keeps growing or if it kind of looks like it's going to taper off somewhere
to asymptote to some dimension value.
But and here you see the norm of the gradient.
This looks qualitatively a bit different from what I showed in the slides, but each time you rerun
this, you're likely to see some different patterns.
Basically, we just want to see that this norm is nonzero and that indicates that it's actually changing
the embeddings.
Optimization is really changing the matrix every step in training.
Okay.
Here I'm just redrawing the same histograms plot from above.
So the blue line and the orange line are identical to what you saw a few moments ago before training.
And here all I do is add the the optimized matrix distribution.
So what happened is that the actual weights values, the embeddings values grew a bit wider.
So they got a little bit more extreme in the tails compared to in the near the peak.
Now we can actually let me see this one I'm going to comment out.
I want to show you that now, because the pre-trained and post trained matrices are the same size,
then we actually can plot them using the actual frequency of counts.
But anyway.
Uh, okay, so now what I want to do is, uh, this is just an image of the embeddings.
So here we have the, uh, 768 embeddings dimensions.
And here we have the five token positions.
This is just another way of visualizing the actual matrix.
Remember it starts off as random.
And this is what it looks like after the optimization.
And it's pretty interesting to see that most of the changes in this matrix happen at the very beginning.
So the matrix was really, uh, different in the beginning.
And after, you know, like tokens two, three and four are basically they look really, really similar.
I'm sure there are some differences in here, but they look overall quite similar.
Okay, so now what we want to do is transform these optimized embeddings back into tokens.
So we can actually look at the text and see if we can make any sense of them.
So the idea is that these are embeddings vectors.
And we want the token that corresponds to the closest match between these optimized embeddings and the
embeddings from the trained GPT two model.
So that's what I do here.
I calculate the cosine similarity between one embedding.
It just happened to pick the first one just for demonstration.
And all of the other embeddings from GPT two.
And then we find the maximum.
So the maximum cosine similarity.
And then we pick that to be the optimized token Spoken for.
Position one.
So for the first token in this optimized sequence.
Now I couldn't even tell you which token that is.
It might be this one or this one or this one, or maybe it's this one.
Actually, the fact that, you know, it's so hard to see which one really is the best matching embeddings
vector, and the fact that the cosine similarities are all fairly small.
Right.
Like they go up to 0.17.
Maybe this already indicates that something weird is happening, that this method is probably not producing
results that are really human interpretable, because this, uh, optimized embeddings vector doesn't
really look like any of the 50,000 embeddings vectors that are learned from actual human written text.
Okay, so this gives me the token for one vector.
And now here I just put that code into a for loop.
And then here we can look at the optimized token sequence.
So ad pc uh brisk brisk breast.
This is the token sequence that maximizes the activation of dimension 90 output dimension 90 in transformer
block four.
Now, what in the world does this mean?
Kind of tough to say.
This is not very human interpretable.
Although the training, the optimization actually worked really, really well.
Right.
We still got like three orders of magnitude increase in the activation of this dimension.
And yet we have a hard time making any human interpretable sense of this sequence, even though this
really does maximize the output of that one dimension.
So out of curiosity, I just ran the entire code script from scratch just to run it all new.
Remember, the model is exactly the same.
All the code is exactly the same.
The only thing that differs every time you rerun this code is the initial random optimization of the
embeddings vectors.
And then here I got a completely different result that has nothing to do with the, uh, the previous
version that I ran through a moment ago.
That's going to be a good segue to the code challenge in the next video.
There are three points I'd like to stress here.
One is that gradient descent is a really incredible and versatile optimization technique.
Basically, if you can define some kind of loss function, you can optimize it using gradient descent.
And gradient ascent is exactly the same.
You just have to stick in a minus sign somewhere.
Now, you may have been wondering why I'm taking the time to introduce you to a method that has already
been proven not to be very successful, or at least not very insightful for interpretability.
First of all, I think that the fact that it has proven not to be very insightful is itself very insightful.
That is a core part of reverse engineering, a complex system.
You need to know what works and you really need to know what doesn't work.
That is especially true for methods that work for some types of deep learning models, but not others.
There is a kind of forensic skill to doing Mac interp research, and that is the combination of attention
to detail, creative thinking, analytical and critical thinking, and also technical proficiency.
And helping you develop all of those skills is really my main goal in this course.